Add blog post about forensic container checkpointing (#37412)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-10-30-forensic-container-checkpointing/index.md

attacker being aware of the inspection.

In addition to the forensic container checkpointing use case, it is also
possible to migrate a container from one node to another node without loosing
the internal state. Especially for stateful containers with long initialization
times restoring from a checkpoint might save time after a reboot or enable much
faster startup times.

## How do I use forensic container checkpointing

The feature is behind a feature gate, so make sure to enable the
`ContainerCheckpointRestore` gate before you can use the new feature.

The runtime must also support forensic container checkpointing:

* containerd: support is currently under discussion. See containerd
  pull request [#6965][containerd-checkpoint-restore-pr] for more details.

* CRI-O: v1.25 has support for forensic container checkpointing.

[containerd-checkpoint-restore-pr]: https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/6965

### Usage example with CRI-O

To use forensic container checkpointing in combination with CRI-O, CRI-O needs
to be started with the command-line options `--enable-criu-support=true
--drop-infra-ctr=false` and Kubernetes needs to be started with the

> `ContainerCheckpointRestore` feature gate enabled.

Reviewer: I assume that you also need a low-level runtime (eg `runc`) that supports checkpointing,
and to have the `criu` tool installed on the same node. Is that right?

Author: added a sentence that it needs to be installed

Once containers and pods are running it is possible to create a checkpoint.
Checkpointing is currently only exposed on the **kubelet** level. To checkpoint
a container the following command can be used to trigger a checkpoint:

```

> # curl -X POST "https://localhost:10250/checkpoint/namespace/podId/container"

Author: removed the prompt and added a line about the CA certificate

```

For a container named *counter* in a pod named *counters* in a namespace named
*default* the **kubelet** API endpoint is reachable at:

```
# curl -X POST "https://localhost:10250/checkpoint/default/counters/counter"
```

For completeness the following `curl` command-line options are necessary to
create a checkpoint:

```
-k --cert /var/run/kubernetes/client-admin.crt --key /var/run/kubernetes/client-admin.key
```

Triggering this **kubelet** API will request the creation of a checkpoint from

> CRI-O and CRI-O will request a checkpoint from *runc* and *runc* will tell CRIU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CRI-O. CRI-O requests a checkpoint from your low-level runtime (for example,
`runc`). Seeing that request, `runc` invokes the `criu` tool
```

to do the actual checkpointing.

Once the checkpointing has finished the checkpoint should be available at
`/var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/checkpoint-<pod-name>_<namespace-name>-<container-name>-<timestamp>.tar`

> This tar archive can now be used to restore the container somewhere else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You could then use that tar archive to restore the container somewhere else.
```

#### Restore checkpointed container outside of Kubernetes

With the checkpoint tar archive it is possible to restore the container outside
of Kubernetes in a sandboxed instance of CRI-O. For better user experience
during restore it is recommended to use the latest version of CRI-O from the

> *main* CRI-O GitHub branch. Using the CRI-O release v1.25 requires the user to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*main* CRI-O GitHub branch. If you're using CRI-O v1.25, you'll need to
```

manually create certain directories Kubernetes would create before starting the
container.

> The first step to restore a container outside of Kubernetes is to create a pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step to restore a container outside of Kubernetes is to create a pod sandbox
```

using *crictl*: `crictl runp pod-config.json`

Then the checkpointed container can be restored into the just create pod:

> `crictl create <POD_ID> container-config.json pod-config.json`

Author: done

Instead of specifying a container image in a registry in `container-config.json`
it is necessary to specify the checkpoint archive as created above:

> ```

Author: added `yaml`

{
  "metadata": {
      "name": "counter"
  },
  "image":{
      "image": "/var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/<checkpoint-archive>.tar"
  }
}
```

> Now the container needs to be started using `crictl start <CONTAINER_ID>` and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, run `crictl start <CONTAINER_ID>` to start that container, and then a
```

copy of the previously checkpointed container should be running.

#### Restore checkpointed container in Kubernetes

To restore the previously checkpointed container directly in Kubernetes it is
necessary to convert the checkpoint archive into an image that can be pushed to
a registry.

One possible way to convert the local checkpoint archive consists of the
following steps with the help of *buildah*:
```
# newcontainer=$(buildah from scratch)
# buildah add $newcontainer /var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/checkpoint-<pod-name>_<namespace-name>-<container-name>-<timestamp>.tar /
# buildah config --annotation=io.kubernetes.cri-o.annotations.checkpoint.name=<container-name> $newcontainer

> # buildah commit $newcontainer checkpoint-image:latest

Author: removed

```

> This image now needs to be a pushed to a registry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you'll need to push that image to a container image registry. For example:
```

```

> # podman push localhost/checkpoint-image:latest registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest

Author: removed

```

To restore this container (`registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest`) the
image needs to be listed in the pod definition:
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: <pod-name>

> spec:

Author: I cannot answer that. No idea. Sorry. I never used a `nodeName` during testing so that I know it works without it.

> spec:

Reviewer: If we want to restore the Pod to a specific Node, we should specify where to place the new Pod. Otherwise, the scheduler will pick one and that might not match our expectation.

> spec:

Author: Thanks. Makes sense. I will add `nodeName`.

```

Triggering this **kubelet** API will request the creation of a checkpoint from
CRI-O. CRI-O requests a checkpoint from your low-level runtime (for example,
`runc`). Seeing that request, `runc` invokes the `criu` tool
to do the actual checkpointing.

Once the checkpointing has finished the checkpoint should be available at
`/var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/checkpoint-<pod-name>_<namespace-name>-<container-name>-<timestamp>.tar`

You could then use that tar archive to restore the container somewhere else.

### Restore a checkpointed container outside of Kubernetes (with CRI-O) {#restore-checkpointed-container-standalone)

With the checkpoint tar archive it is possible to restore the container outside
of Kubernetes in a sandboxed instance of CRI-O. For better user experience
during restore, I recommend that you use the latest version of CRI-O from the
*main* CRI-O GitHub branch. If you're using CRI-O v1.25, you'll need to
manually create certain directories Kubernetes would create before starting the
container.

The first step to restore a container outside of Kubernetes is to create a pod sandbox
using *crictl*:
```shell
crictl runp pod-config.json
```

> Then you can restore the previously checkpointed container into the newly created pod:

Reviewer: Another nit:
```suggestion
Then you can restore the previously checkpointed container into the newly created pod sandbox:
```

you'd need specify the path to the checkpoint archive that you created earlier:
```yaml
{
  "metadata": {
      "name": "counter"
  },
  "image":{
      "image": "/var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/<checkpoint-archive>.tar"
  }
}
```

Next, run `crictl start <CONTAINER_ID>` to start that container, and then a
copy of the previously checkpointed container should be running.

### Restore a checkpointed container within of Kubernetes {#restore-checkpointed-container-k8s)

To restore the previously checkpointed container directly in Kubernetes it is
necessary to convert the checkpoint archive into an image that can be pushed to
a registry.

One possible way to convert the local checkpoint archive consists of the
following steps with the help of *buildah*:
```shell
newcontainer=$(buildah from scratch)
buildah add $newcontainer /var/lib/kubelet/checkpoints/checkpoint-<pod-name>_<namespace-name>-<container-name>-<timestamp>.tar /
buildah config --annotation=io.kubernetes.cri-o.annotations.checkpoint.name=<container-name> $newcontainer
buildah commit $newcontainer checkpoint-image:latest
```

Now, you'll need to push that image to a container image registry. For example:
```shell

> podman push localhost/checkpoint-image:latest registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
podman push localhost/checkpoint-image:latest container-image-registry.example/user/checkpoint-image:latest
```

```

> To restore this container (`registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest`) the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restore this checkpoint image (`container-image-registry.example/user/checkpoint-image:latest`), the
```

image needs to be listed in the specification for a Pod. Here's an example
manifest:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  namePrefix: example-
spec:
  containers:
  - name: <container-name>

>     image: registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    image: container-image-registry.example/user/checkpoint-image:latest
```

```

Kubernetes schedules the new Pod onto a node. The kubelet on that node
instructs the container runtime (CRI-O in this example) to create and start a
container based on an image specified as `registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest`.
CRI-O detects that `registry/user/checkpoint-image:latest`
is a reference to checkpoint data rather than a container image. Then,
instead of the usual steps to create and start a container,
CRI-O fetches the checkpoint data and restores the container from that

> specified checkpoint.

Reviewer: Does this need any special support from the registry? If not, is there any risk that a malicious user creates an image that appears to be a normal app but is in fact a checkpointed container that is then able to bypass some security controls?

If there is a way to tell the two kinds apart, I assume that some registries might need to code in special support.

Author: > Does this need any special support from the registry?

No.

> If not, is there any risk that a malicious user creates an image that appears to be a normal app but is in fact a checkpointed container that is then able to bypass some security controls?

Hard to answer as I am probably not aware of every security control, but selinux, apparmor, seccomp is restored as it was before.

> If there is a way to tell the two kinds apart, I assume that some registries might need to code in special support.

At this point we just use a really simple image with a single layer and a couple of annotations. We are currently trying to come up with a standard: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/issues/962

Reviewer: Let's mention (or document) that the image format is pre-alpha, or something akin to that.

Reviewer: It seems to me that we should use a custom `mediaType` for these checkpoints, and that there are some potential interesting issues with allowing container runtimes to load images like this.

If the existing `runc` and `crun` support doesn't distinguish by media type, then I think we should warn readers that these runtimes are shipping the new feature before a security review.

Author: I do not understand your comment about the `mediaType`. `runc`/`crun` just works with a directory which is specified by Podman/CRI-O/containerd. So I guess the `mediaType` is something on that level, but not sure what your comment means in the context of this post. Is this something for the image-spec discussion?

Author: Thanks for the explanation.

> Somehow, I'm not sure how, runc / containerd / kubelet / ??? seems to have a way to tell the difference between unpacking a plain container image, and unpacking / processing a snapshot.

The code in Podman and CRI-O is first looking for annotations and if the annotation is present the image is unpacked and passed to CRIU.

> An attacker might make a “container image”, let's say they call it nginx:latest, that is actually a snapshot. Perhaps they are able to find a bug in CRIU and exploit that, even where the person who specified the Pod didn't intend to run any snapshot at all.

Understood. Could be a way to exploit this right. It is important to remember that we have this situation for a long time. containerd supports their own checkpoint images for a "long" time, so this is something which could have happened before and not something completely new. Just mentioning it also here, we could not use the containerd checkpoint image format, because it includes containerd internal protobuf blobs which are not useful outside of containerd. That is the reason we started the image-spec discussion.

> Let's communicate that this represents an unmeasured risk.

I will add something to the document to highlight this. At this point CRIU support needs to be manually enabled in CRI-O so that it would make sense to highlight this at the point where I am talking about how to enable it in CRI-O.
